Relaytic-AML: A Local-First Agentic Evaluation Lab for
Financial-Crime Machine Learning
ML-Enthusiast
Independent researcher
83662706+ML-Enthusiast-de@users.noreply.github.com
June 2026
Abstract
Anti-money laundering (AML) machine-learning results are difficult to trust when privacy constraints, temporal validity, graph provenance, leakage controls, review capacity, and
public claims are handled separately. Relaytic-AML is a local-first evaluation lab in which
role-scoped agents create auditable evidence cells and conservative claim gates decide what
those cells are allowed to support. The current evidence pack reports PaySim synthetic
temporal-fraud PR-AUC 0.6388, Elliptic temporal graph-feature PR-AUC 0.6688, and Elliptic2 context PR-AUC 0.9432 +/- 0.0009, with the Elliptic2 row kept below the recorded
RevClassifyDS reference of 0.974. The contribution is a reproducible AI evaluation-lab and
governance architecture for financial-crime experimentation, not a claim of detector superiority.

1

Introduction

AML modeling is a rare-event, high-stakes evaluation problem. The input may be a stream
of mobile-money transfers, card events, account activity, wire messages, customer profiles, or
blockchain transactions. Suspicion rarely appears in one row. It often appears as a temporal
or network pattern: fast movement of funds after receipt, repeated transfers through related
accounts, structured amounts, new counterparties receiving many payments, activity that does
not match a customer’s profile, or cryptocurrency behavior that involves risky services and geography. Regulatory and typology material from FATF, FinCEN, and FFIEC describes this kind
of pattern-based reasoning in operational language [Financial Action Task Force, 2020, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, 2026, Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council,
2026].
A useful score is not enough. A reader needs to know which data stayed local, which columns
were available at decision time, how time or graph boundaries were split, whether model selection
touched the test surface, what review budget was assumed, and what interpretation the evidence
can support. These questions become sharper when large language models (LLMs) or coding
agents assist the research workflow, because fluent explanations can drift away from the artifact
record unless the system is designed to fail closed.
Relaytic began as a general local-first inference-engineering lab. Relaytic-AML is the financialcrime edition used here to test whether that architecture can support governed AML experimentation. It is a set of cooperating agents and deterministic harnesses around a local artifact
store. The guide helps a user or another agent understand where the run is. The scout checks
source posture, schema, leakage risk, and split feasibility. The strategist turns the objective into
1

a task contract. The scientist challenges baselines, ablations, and budget choices. The builder
executes bounded runs. Reviewers reconstruct traces. Release governors lint claims, figures,
tables, source packages, and public wording against the evidence record.
The paper is therefore a systems and methodology paper. The benchmark rows matter because
they exercise the architecture under temporal, graph, operating-point, and claim-governance
pressure. They are not presented as a new best detector family. The central question is whether
a local evaluation lab can keep evidence, agent assistance, privacy boundaries, and publishable
claims aligned.
The work is organized around four research questions:
• RQ1: Can Relaytic-AML produce reproducible evidence cells for AML-style temporal
and graph tasks?
• RQ2: Can it prevent leakage-prone or unsupported claims from being promoted?
• RQ3: Can the local artifact record support rowless handoff to external agents while
preserving provenance?
• RQ4: Do the benchmark rows demonstrate useful, bounded detector evidence under
explicit split and budget contracts?
This paper makes four contributions. First, it presents a local-first artifact graph and role-scoped
agent runtime for AML evaluation. Second, it defines an evidence-cell schema tying each metric
to dataset, split, command, artifact, budget, leakage posture, operating point, and claim state.
Third, it contributes a release and claim-gating harness that turns local artifacts into tables,
figures, source packages, and manuscript claims while blocking unsupported interpretations.
Fourth, it gives public demonstrations on PaySim, Elliptic, and Elliptic2 context rows under
strict claim boundaries.

2

Related Work

The AML benchmark landscape is moving toward larger, more realistic, and more graph-native
settings. PaySim remains useful as a synthetic mobile-money fraud simulator for temporal
proxy experiments [Lopez-Rojas et al., 2016]. Elliptic introduced a public Bitcoin transaction
graph with anonymized node features and temporal labels [Weber et al., 2019]. Elliptic2 and
RevTrack/RevClassify shifted attention to suspicious subgraphs and richer blockchain context
[Bellei et al., 2024, Song et al., 2024]. Recent work such as TransXion, LineMVGNN, quasitemporal graph extraction, BlazingAML, and continual graph-learning studies shows that the
research frontier increasingly treats AML as dynamic graph and systems work rather than static
tabular classification [Chen et al., 2026, Poon et al., 2026, Tariq and Hassani, 2026, Ye et al.,
2026, Deprez et al., 2025].
Relaytic-AML does not compete with those papers as a new graph-neural detector. Its position
is complementary. It asks how an experiment should be governed when data is local or licensed,
the task may be temporal or graph-based, analyst review capacity matters, and an agentassisted workflow must still produce evidence that a skeptical reviewer can audit. That places
the system near dataset documentation, model reporting, reproducibility practice, experiment
tracking, and governance work [Gebru et al., 2021, Mitchell et al., 2019, Pineau et al., 2021].
The system also differs from adjacent evaluation artifacts. Model cards explain a trained model,
but they do not usually bind every number to a command, split, artifact field, and blocked-claim
2

state. Datasheets describe data, but they do not run the model-search and release gates. Reproducibility checklists improve reporting, but they are often static forms rather than executable
evidence. MLOps experiment trackers preserve runs, but they are not designed to govern public
scientific claims about local, licensed, or privacy-sensitive AML data. Agent benchmarks evaluate agents, while Relaytic-AML uses agents inside an evaluation lab and then tests whether
the lab keeps the agents honest. This is the new systems contribution: evidence, agents, local
privacy, and publishable wording are coupled in one deterministic release path.
Recent agent-evaluation work shows that language-model systems can produce persuasive research artifacts while still failing on reproduction, validation, or expert-level judgment [Chen
et al., 2025, Starace et al., 2025, Wijk et al., 2025]. Skill- and tool-using agents make that
opportunity larger and the governance problem sharper [Yang et al., 2026]. Relaytic-AML responds by making model scores, public claims, handoff packets, and paper assets downstream
of local artifacts rather than downstream of a conversation transcript.

3

System Overview

Relaytic-AML is built around one authority rule: the workspace owns the truth. Raw data,
licensed benchmark files, run summaries, traces, metric cells, model outputs, tables, figures, and
release reports live on disk. Agents may explain, propose, and repair, but their proposals only
become evidence when they are materialized as artifacts another human or agent can inspect.

Relaytic-AML evidence loop
Local artifacts are authoritative; agents propose, execute, review, and gate claims through files.

Local inputs

Role loops

Run artifacts

Evidence cells

Release gates

dataset_registry.json
split_contracts.json
source hashes

guide -> scout
strategist -> scientist
builder -> reviewers

benchmark_manifest.json
feature_report.json
search_trace.json

cell_id
metric + artifact field
claim_state

public_claims_allowed
source package audit
rowless handoff

private rows stay local

validation choices precede test scoring

external agents receive redacted state

The same artifact graph feeds CLI, skills, MCP adapters, paper tables, vector figures, and release checks.

Figure 1: Relaytic-AML local-first architecture: local data and artifacts flow through rolescoped agents into evidence cells, claim gates, and paper/release/handoff surfaces.
Figure 1 summarizes the local evidence loop. Dataset registries and split contracts enter the
role-scoped agent runtime. Candidate runs write benchmark manifests, search traces, feature
reports, and metric cells. Claim gates read those cells together with release audits and emit
only the interpretations that the evidence supports. The same contract feeds the command-line
interface, project skills, OpenClaw-style handoff, Claude/Codex skill files, and Model Context
Protocol (MCP) adapters.
The external-agent path is rowless by default. Relaytic can export current state, next-action op3

tions, artifact shortlists, and safe commands for another model without sending raw transaction
rows, secrets, or private local paths. A local LLM can optionally help phrase guidance, but the
deterministic guide and evidence artifacts remain the source of truth. That separation matters
for private AML work: outside intelligence may help navigate the run, but data residency and
claim provenance stay local unless an operator deliberately changes policy.

4

Evidence Cell and Claim-Gate Design

An evidence cell is the unit that makes a paper number auditable. It is not just a metric value.
It records the dataset, split, command, artifact field, model or feature budget, leakage posture,
operating point, and claim state. That structure gives a reviewer two kinds of visibility: how
the number was produced, and what the number is allowed to mean.

Evidence-cell schema
A reported number is publishable only when the metric and its claim boundary are bound to provenance.

cell_id

dataset_id

split

paper-cell:paysim...test_pr_auc

PaySim / Elliptic / Elliptic2

train, validation, test, official

command

artifact_ref.field

budget_tier

relaytic release-safety ...

manifest.json -> test_pr_auc

baseline, competitive, context

leakage_posture

operating_point

claim_state

forbidden fields excluded

review budget and threshold

supporting, context, blocked

Tables and figures read these cells instead of copying benchmark numbers by hand.

Figure 2: Evidence-cell schema: every reported number carries dataset, split, command,
artifact, budget, leakage posture, operating point, metric, and claim state.
Table 1 uses compact publication aliases for readability; the full machine metric-cell identifiers
are preserved in the metric-cell audit artifact and generated table comments.

4

Table 1. Representative evidence cells.
Evidence cell

Dataset

Metric

PS-PR

PaySim

PS-P@B

PaySim

EL-PR

Elliptic

EL-P@B

Elliptic

Split

Evidence

Budget

Claim state

test PR-AUC 0.6388

test

competitive

precision at
0.7033
review
budget
test PR-AUC 0.6688

test

PaySim run;
manifest
PaySim run;
manifest

supporting
only
supporting
only

E2-PRm

Elliptic2

E2-ref

Elliptic2

precision at
review
budget
official test
PR-AUC
mean
published
reference
PR-AUC

Value

test

graph run;
feature table
graph run;
feature table

competitive

competitive

1

test

competitive

0.9432

official test

E2 run;
scorecard

competitive
context

0.974

reported
reference

E2 run;
scorecard

competitive
context

supporting
only
supporting
only
context only;
no
contribution
context only;
no
contribution

Algorithm 1 Evidence-cell creation
1: Input: dataset registry D, split contract S, candidate budget B, run artifacts A
2: Output: evidence cell c with provenance and claim state
3: Freeze source posture, license posture, task target, and split contract.
4: Derive only features allowed by S and record excluded leakage fields.
5: Run baseline candidates under the declared baseline budget.
6: Run stronger candidates only within B and select on validation evidence.
7: Evaluate the selected row once on the fixed test surface.
8: Write c = dataset, split, command, artifact field, metric, value, budget, leakage posture,
operating point, claim state.
9: Publish c only through tables, figures, and release text that reference the cell identifier.
The claim gate is the second half of the design. It is deliberately conservative. If the evidence cell
is incomplete, if a split is leakage-prone, if a metric is only a proxy, or if a stronger interpretation
needs a different dataset or study, the gate preserves the evidence but blocks the stronger claim.
This is a mechanism, not a disclaimer: it changes what the paper generator and public release
surfaces are allowed to say.
Algorithm 2 Claim-gate validation
1: Input: proposed public claim q, evidence cells C, publishability gates G, limitation matrix
L
2: Output: allowed wording or blocked-claim record
3: Resolve every evidence cell named by q and require dataset, split, command, artifact, budget, and leakage fields.
4: Compare the strength of q with source posture, split validity, metric scope, and benchmark
role.
5: If q is exactly supported, emit the bounded wording and the evidence-cell identifiers.
6: If q is stronger than C and G permit, block q and write the gate reason.
7: Attach the missing evidence needed to move q from blocked to testable future work.
8: Keep blocked evidence visible, but route it to limitations or context rather than headline
claims.
Figure 3 gives concrete gate behavior. A PaySim row can support a synthetic temporal-fraud
result, but not a real-bank AML superiority statement. An Elliptic row can support temporal
5

Claim-gate examples
The gate keeps useful evidence visible while preventing unsupported public promotion.
supported evidence

blocked public claim

evidence needed

PaySim

synthetic temporal-fraud
PR-AUC cell

real-bank AML
superiority

partner holdout +
incumbent queue study

Elliptic

temporal graph-feature
provenance

graph-neural
detector advance

graph-native budget +
neural baselines

modern subgraph
context row

RevClassifyDS
parity

faithful reference run +
cohort reconciliation

Elliptic2

Blocked claims are routed to missing evidence or limitations, not to headline wording.

Figure 3: Claim-gate examples: allowed claims, blocked promotions, and evidence needed
before stronger public interpretations.
graph-feature provenance, but not graph-neural dominance. An Elliptic2 row can be modern
benchmark context while the reference-parity claim remains blocked.

5

Experimental Protocol

The experiments test Relaytic-AML as an evaluation lab. The datasets are separated by claim
posture. PaySim is the main empirical demonstration because it is fully local and supports a
controlled temporal proxy workflow. Elliptic tests temporal graph provenance and feature-view
discipline. Elliptic2 tests whether the system can keep modern-context evidence visible without
promoting it to a performance contribution.
Table 2a. Dataset scale and split contracts.
Dataset

Task

Scale and positives Train / validation
/ test

PaySim synthetic
mobile-money
transaction fraud

Synthetic
temporal
transaction fraud

6,362,620
rows/nodes; 8213
positives

Elliptic Bitcoin
transaction graph

Temporal Bitcoin
graph node
classification

Elliptic2 large
Bitcoin subgraph
AML dataset

Suspicious-versuslicit subgraph
context

Split rule

train: 6,010,937,
time step
pos 0.08%;
validation:
228,103, pos
0.68%; test:
123,580, pos 1.34%
203,769
train: 26,381, pos graph time
rows/nodes; 4545
10.88%; validation:
positives
8,999, pos 11.53%;
test: 11,184, pos
5.69%
122,000 labeled
val 11,059, test
fixed partition
subgraphs; context 11,105; test
row
positives 272

Table 2b. Feature and metric policy.

6

Source hash
sha256 prefix
16910f90577b

sha256 prefix
93e2e7b2405c plus
2 files

not bundled

Track

Allowed feature policy

Forbidden or gated
inputs

Primary metrics

Claim posture

PaySim

26 decision-time
features; balance
columns excluded

PR-AUC, P@k,
R@budget

supporting-only

Elliptic

structural same
snapshot only; source
provided flattened
features; source
features plus
structural snapshot
pooled moments
counts; raw subgraphs
local-gated

balance columns, raw
account IDs, simulator
flags, random row
shuffles
future-to-train edges
and random node
splits across time

PR-AUC, P@k,
fixed-FPR recall

supporting-only

claim use gated by
reference parity and
local data availability

PR-AUC, P@k,
fixed-FPR recall

blocked

Elliptic2

Tables 2a and 2b record the context a reader needs before interpreting any metric. The positive
rates show why precision-recall area under the curve (PR-AUC) is the primary score. These are
rare-event tasks where receiver-operating-characteristic area under the curve can look strong
while the review queue remains poor. The split rules are equally important: PaySim is split
by chronological simulator step, Elliptic by time-step graph windows, and Elliptic2 by the
official/context partitions recorded in the local evidence pack.
Table 3. Model families and search budgets.
Track

Model family
scope

Feature family
scope

Budget

Selection rule

Seeds

PaySim

tree ensembles and
gradient boosting;
fixed-rule baseline
retained
tree ensembles and
gradient boosting
over frozen feature
views

amount, type,
time, train-only
thresholds, shifted
destination history
source anonymized
node features,
same-snapshot
graph features,
combined view

14 probes; 5 full
finalists

validation
PR-AUC only;
Platt calibration

42

16 validation
trials; LightGBM
selected

validation
PR-AUC within
declared feature
views;
validation-only
calibration and
threshold
official partition
plus content-hash
robustness;
reference parity
gate remains
blocked

42

Elliptic

Elliptic2

3 repeated seeds;
context row only

pooled-moment
348 pooled
LightGBM context subgraph
candidate
moment/count
features

11, 42, 73

Table 3 records the modeling effort without presenting the paper as a hyperparameter leaderboard. PaySim uses a two-stage competitive budget: probes over a seeded train-only sample, five
full-training finalists, validation-only calibration, and one fixed test evaluation for the selected
finalist. Elliptic uses a graph-feature budget over source-provided anonymized features, samesnapshot structural features, and their combination. Elliptic2 uses repeated pooled-moment
LightGBM context rows with seeds 11, 42, and 73, but this row is not a Relaytic performance
contribution because reference-protocol parity is unresolved.
The feature policy is strictest for PaySim because simulator balance columns can leak postevent state. Relaytic excludes those balance fields, raw origin and destination identifiers as
model features, and simulator flags. It allows row-local amount, type, and time features, trainonly thresholds, and destination history shifted before each step. The isolated contribution of
destination-history features has not been measured as a separate test row, so it is not reported
as a main result.
7

6

Results

Table 4. PaySim modeling path.
Stage

Model or contract

P4 reference

SGD logistic baseline

P6 baseline
Competitive search

Final model

Change

source-safe starting
point
Extra Trees baseline
leakage-safe feature set
XGBoost probe
26 allowed features;
best validation
PR-AUC 0.5944
Extra Trees with Platt validation-selected
calibration
finalist evaluated once
on test

Test PR-AUC

Claim use

0.2159

not a paper claim

0.3313
test hidden until
selected finalist

baseline only
search evidence only

0.6388

supporting synthetic
temporal-proxy claim

PaySim is the clearest modeling result in the current evidence pack. The earliest reference row
was PR-AUC 0.2159. The later leakage-safe baseline improved to 0.3313, and the competitive
selected Extra Trees model reached fixed-test PR-AUC 0.6388 and ROC-AUC 0.9683. The
improvement is meaningful inside the synthetic temporal-fraud contract because it follows a
visible sequence: balance fields were excluded, prior-step destination history was added without
raw account encoding, candidates were selected by validation PR-AUC, and calibration and
thresholding used validation-only partitions. The allowed claim is precise: Relaytic-AML can
produce a stronger, leakage-audited PaySim temporal-proxy row under a declared budget. It
cannot turn that row into evidence of real-bank AML superiority.
The review-budget metrics sharpen the interpretation. At the selected PaySim review budget,
precision is 0.7033 and recall is 0.4716. The top of the queue is much richer than prevalence,
but a large share of fraud remains outside the reviewed set. That is a useful operating result
for an evaluation lab because it connects ranking quality to analyst capacity instead of treating
PR-AUC as the whole story.
Elliptic is a different kind of evidence. The validation-selected source-plus-structural LightGBM
row reports test PR-AUC 0.6688, with review-budget precision 1 and recall 0.0566. The result
supports temporal graph-feature provenance and operating-point reporting. It also reveals a
limitation: the current graph-structure-only floor is weak, and the final row is heavily influenced
by source-provided anonymized features. Relaytic can therefore claim graph-aware evidence
handling, not a new graph-native detector.
Elliptic2 is intentionally framed as context. The repeated official-partition context row reports
PR-AUC 0.9432 +/- 0.0009, and the content-hash robustness partition reports mean PR-AUC
0.9297. Those are strong absolute values, but the recorded RevClassifyDS reference is 0.974, and
the local parity gate records unresolved cohort and reference-execution issues. The scientific
result is that Relaytic keeps the context row available while blocking a parity or superiority
interpretation.
Figure 4 separates ranking metrics from operating-point metrics. PR-AUC summarizes ranking
quality under rare-event imbalance. Precision and recall at the selected review budget describe
what the top of an analyst queue would contain under the paper’s fixed policy. Keeping those
views together, but visually separated, is important because a useful top queue can still leave
many positives unreviewed.

8

Benchmark evidence and review-budget context
Ranking metrics and operating-point metrics are grouped separately because they answer different questions.

Panel A: PR-AUC ranking evidence

Panel B: fixed review queue

PaySim
synthetic temporal proxy

PaySim precision
0.6388

0.7033

PaySim recall
0.6688

0.4716

Elliptic precision
0.9432

1

0.974Elliptic recall

0.0566

top queue

Elliptic
temporal graph features

reviewed fraud

Elliptic2
context only

top queue

RevClassifyDS
external reference

reviewed illicit

0

0.5

1

0

0.5

1

Elliptic2 is shown as context only. Precision/recall rows use the validation-selected review-budget policy.

Figure 4: Benchmark and review-budget evidence: PR-AUC is shown beside precision and
recall at the bounded review queue instead of being interpreted alone.

7

System Evaluation

The system claim is evaluated through deterministic reader and agent tasks. These checks ask
whether a reviewer can navigate from the README to the paper evidence, trace PaySim metric
provenance, compare baseline and competitive budgets, keep Elliptic2 as context rather than a
contribution, export rowless state for an external agent, recover an interrupted run, and block
over-strong public claims. This is narrower than a human-subject usability study, but it directly
tests the infrastructure claim made by the paper.
Table 5. System audit matrix.
Check

Command or test

Evidence

Pass criterion

Observed result

Metric provenance

metric provenance

required fields present

pass; fields 13/13

Budget comparison

budget comparability
claim-boundary check

Rowless handoff

reference-parity
firewall
handoff recovery

Interrupted recovery

no-lost-user recovery

guide recovery report

Claim fail-closed

claim-gate cases

blocked-claim case
studies

same dataset, split
doctrine, and metric
supporting=true;
hard/headline=false
context visible; parity
blocked
state, tools, next
action; no rows
stage, shortlist, next
action exposed
unsupported wording
blocked

pass; 0.3313 to 0.6388

PaySim claim
boundary
Elliptic2 firewall

PaySim selected
PR-AUC cell
PaySim baseline and
competitive cells
PaySim publishability
row
Elliptic2 publishability
row
agent handoff report

pass; supporting only
pass; context only
pass; rowless handoff
pass; partial recovery
pass; case gates pass

Table 5 reports the audit matrix behind the system claim. The important result is not that a
script returned a generic pass flag. It is that each checked behavior has an observed signal: 13 of
13 provenance fields are present for the PaySim metric cell, baseline and competitive budgets are
comparable under the same contract, Elliptic2 is firewalled as context, rowless handoff exposes
no raw rows, and interrupted-run recovery surfaces state, missing evidence, and next actions.
9

Table 6. Blocked claim examples.
Proposed invalid claim

Gate reason

Relaytic-AML is superior for
real-bank AML detection.

PaySim is synthetic and the
current evidence is a temporal
proxy result.

Relaytic-AML reaches
RevClassifyDS parity on
Elliptic2.
Relaytic-AML is a graph-neural
detector advance.

Missing evidence

Partner or bank-approved
holdout, incumbent comparison,
analyst-review protocol, and
legal release gate.
The context row is below the
Faithful reference execution,
recorded reference and
cohort reconciliation, resource
reference-protocol parity remains budget, and repeated parity
unresolved.
report.
Elliptic evidence uses
Graph-native release budget,
graph-feature provenance and
neural baselines, repeated seeds,
tree/boosting baselines, not a
and graph-specific ablations.
new graph-neural family.

Table 6 shows how the gate behaves on concrete over-strong claims. The blocked claims are not
hidden. They are converted into missing-evidence records, which makes future work actionable
while keeping the current paper below its evidence boundary.
Table 7. Rowless handoff and interrupted-run recovery examples.
Scenario

Input state

External-agent handoff partial run with
available guide state

Safe next action

external model asked
what to do next

Interrupted-run
recovery

operator returns to
partial run without
artifact literacy

Exported fields

Redacted fields

Observed signal

state summary, action
options, starter
questions, tool
contract, artifact
shortlist
six next actions, six
starter questions,
command options
current state, missing
evidence count,
canonical artifact
shortlist,
context-export
command

raw transaction rows,
credentials, private
paths, raw source files

raw_rows=False;
redactions=8;
blocked_fields=6

unredacted local paths actions=6;
and data rows
starter_questions=6
raw benchmark data
and private machine
paths

state=partial_run;
missing=8; actions=6

Table 7 gives the practical external-agent story. A second model can receive state, commands,
artifacts, and starter questions, while raw rows remain redacted together with private machine
paths. The same mechanism helps an inexperienced or interrupted user recover the next action
without knowing which internal artifact to inspect first.

8

Limitations and Threats to Validity

PaySim is synthetic. It is useful for controlled temporal fraud experiments, but it is not evidence
of bank-scale AML superiority. The simulator has known simplifications, and the current result
should be interpreted as a leakage-audited proxy result. The destination-history feature contract
is present, but the isolated destination-history ablation is not in the current evidence pack, so
no separate result is claimed for that feature family.
Public blockchain data is also not the same as bank AML. Elliptic provides a valuable temporal
graph task, but unknown labels, anonymized features, and public-chain behavior limit direct operational interpretation. Elliptic2 is modern and highly relevant, but the current local evidence
10

does not satisfy the stronger reference-parity conditions needed for a performance contribution
against RevClassifyDS.
The deterministic system checks are not a substitute for a human usability study. They show
that artifacts, redactions, claim gates, and recovery surfaces are present and internally consistent. They do not measure analyst time, production incident rates, organizational adoption,
or real investigation quality. Future work should test stronger release budgets, repeated runs,
private or partner-approved holdouts, same-queue incumbent comparisons, and graph-native
families under the same evidence-cell discipline.
The system is intentionally local-first, which creates a tradeoff. Privacy and provenance improve
because raw rows stay local, but external reviewers cannot rerun licensed or private data without
obtaining it themselves. The paper handles that by publishing commands, hashes where allowed,
generated artifacts, and claim boundaries, but a fully independent reproduction of every heavy
benchmark still depends on legal access to the source datasets.

9

Reproducibility

The repository is larger than this AML paper. Relaytic is the general local-first inference lab
and public package; Relaytic-AML is the focused AML edition used here for the manuscript.
A reader should start with the README and this paper. Development-control files record the
build history, but they are not required to understand the paper claims.
Table 8. Reproducibility contract.
Component

Command

Expected output

Paper artifacts

paper-release;
paper-arxiv-source

deterministic
generators; source
hashes in manifest

PaySim benchmark

release-safety
paysim-competitive
–budget-tier
competitive
–run-optional –format
json
release-safety
graph-baselines
–budget-tier
competitive
–run-optional –format
json
release-safety
paper-system-eval
–format json

Markdown draft,
Python >=3.10; CI
arXiv main.tex, vector matrix covers 3.10 and
figures
3.11; full extra installs
numpy, pandas,
scikit-learn, matplotlib
PaySim selected
local Kaggle PaySim
PR-AUC cell
file required

Elliptic selected
PR-AUC cell

sha256 prefix
93e2e7b2405c plus 2
files

Elliptic benchmark

System evaluation

Environment or data
dependency

local Kaggle Elliptic
files required

task, handoff, recovery, repo-local
and claim-gate reports deterministic fixtures

Minimal regeneration commands are shown below.

11

Hash or seed record

sha256 prefix
16910f90577b

all required
system-evaluation
tasks pass in current
evidence pack

Windows PowerShell:
py
py
py
py
py

-3.11 -m pip install -e ".[full]"
-3.11 -m relaytic.ui.cli release-safety paper-system-eval --format json
-3.11 -m relaytic.ui.cli release-safety paper-release --format json
-3.11 -m relaytic.ui.cli release-safety paper-arxiv-source --format json
-3.11 -m pytest ‘
tests/test_paper_track_p13.py ‘
tests/test_paper_track_p14.py ‘
tests/test_paper_track_p15.py -q

macOS/Linux:
python3 -m pip install -e ".[full]"
python3 -m relaytic.ui.cli release-safety paper-system-eval --format json
python3 -m relaytic.ui.cli release-safety paper-release --format json
python3 -m relaytic.ui.cli release-safety paper-arxiv-source --format json
python3 -m pytest \
tests/test_paper_track_p13.py \
tests/test_paper_track_p14.py \
tests/test_paper_track_p15.py -q

Raw benchmark data is not committed. PaySim and Elliptic require local downloads and are
referenced through registry artifacts, split reports, hashes, and command ledgers. Elliptic2
remains context-only in this paper because the stronger reference-parity conditions are not
satisfied locally. Clean clones can reproduce the paper-generation checks and repo-local public fixtures; full benchmark regeneration requires the locally licensed datasets named in the
README.
LLM tools assisted with drafting, editing, repository inspection, and consistency checks. They
are not authors. The evidence cells, code, figures, tables, limitations, and final claims remain
the author’s responsibility.

10

Conclusion

Relaytic-AML shows how an agent-assisted AML evaluation lab can be built around local evidence rather than conversational memory. The system keeps data posture, temporal and graph
split validity, leakage controls, model budgets, review-budget operating points, rowless handoff,
and public claims inside one artifact record. The PaySim, Elliptic, and Elliptic2 rows are useful
because they demonstrate that architecture under realistic forms of pressure, including rare
events, graph provenance, modern benchmark context, and blocked claims.
The strongest claim supported today is architectural: Relaytic-AML can make AML experiments easier to inspect, easier to challenge, safer to hand off to another agent, and harder to
overstate. Stronger detector and business-value claims require stronger evidence. That is the
boundary the system is designed to preserve.

12

References
Claudio Bellei, Muhua Xu, Ross Phillips, Tom Robinson, Mark Weber, Tim Kaler, Charles E.
Leiserson, Arvind, and Jie Chen. The shape of money laundering: Subgraph representation
learning on the blockchain with the elliptic2 dataset, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2404.19109.
Hui Chen, Miao Xiong, Yujie Lu, Wei Han, Ailin Deng, Yufei He, Jiaying Wu, Yibo Li, Yue Liu,
and Bryan Hooi. Mlr-bench: Evaluating ai agents on open-ended machine learning research,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.19955.
Keyang Chen, Mingxuan Jiang, Yongsheng Zhao, Zeping Li, Zaiyuan Chen, Weiqi Luo, Zhixin
Li, Sen Liu, Yinan Jing, Guangnan Ye, Xihong Wu, and Hongfeng Chai. Transxion: A highfidelity graph benchmark for realistic anti-money laundering, 2026. URL https://arxiv.or
g/abs/2604.17420.
Bruno Deprez, Wei Wei, Wouter Verbeke, Bart Baesens, Kevin Mets, and Tim Verdonck. Advances in continual graph learning for anti-money laundering systems: A comprehensive
review, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.24259.
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council. Bsa/aml examination manual: Appendix
f, money laundering and terrorist financing red flags, 2026. URL https://bsaaml.ffiec.g
ov/manual/Appendices/07.
Financial Action Task Force. Virtual assets red flag indicators of money laundering and terrorist
financing, 2020. URL https://www.fatf-gafi.org/en/publications/Methodsandtrends
/Virtual-assets-red-flag-indicators.html.
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. Alerts, advisories, notices, bulletins, and fact sheets,
2026. URL https://www.fincen.gov/resources/advisoriesbulletinsfact-sheets.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach, Hal Daume III, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. Communications of the
ACM, 64(12):86–92, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3458723. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.090
10.
Edgar Alonso Lopez-Rojas, Ahmad Elmir, and Stefan Axelsson. Paysim: A financial mobile
money simulator for fraud detection. In Proceedings of the 28th European Modeling and
Simulation Symposium, 2016. URL https://www.msc-les.org/proceedings/emss/2016/E
MSS2016_249.pdf.
Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben
Hutchinson, Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. Model cards for
model reporting. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 220–229, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3287560.3287596. URL https://arxiv.org/ab
s/1810.03993.
Joelle Pineau, Philippe Vincent-Lamarre, Koustuv Sinha, Vincent Lariviere, Alina Beygelzimer,
Florence d’Alche Buc, Emily Fox, and Hugo Larochelle. Improving reproducibility in machine
learning research. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(164):1–20, 2021. URL https:
//www.jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-303.html.
Chung-Hoo Poon, James Kwok, Calvin Chow, and Jang-Hyeon Choi. Linemvgnn: Anti-money
laundering with line-graph-assisted multi-view graph neural networks, 2026. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2603.23584.
13

Kiwhan Song, Mohamed Ali Dhraief, Muhua Xu, Locke Cai, Xuhao Chen, Arvind, and Jie
Chen. Identifying money laundering subgraphs on the blockchain. In Proceedings of the 5th
ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3677052.3698635. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08394.
Giulio Starace, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, James Aung, Jun Shern Chan, Leon Maksin,
Rachel Dias, Evan Mays, Benjamin Kinsella, Wyatt Thompson, Johannes Heidecke, Amelia
Glaese, and Tejal Patwardhan. Paperbench: Evaluating ai’s ability to replicate ai research,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.01848.
Haseeb Tariq and Marwan Hassani. Extracting money laundering transactions from quasitemporal graph representation, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.02899.
Mark Weber, Giacomo Domeniconi, Jie Chen, Daniel Karl I. Weidele, Claudio Bellei, Tom
Robinson, and Charles E. Leiserson. Anti-money laundering in bitcoin: Experimenting with
graph convolutional networks for financial forensics, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
1908.02591.
Hjalmar Wijk, Tao Roa Lin, Joel Becker, Sami Jawhar, Neev Parikh, T. Broadley, Lawrence
Chan, Michael Chen, Joshua M. Clymer, Jai Dhyani, Elena Ericheva, Katharyn Garcia,
Brian Goodrich, Nikola Jurkovic, Megan Kinniment, Aron Lajko, Seraphina Nix, Lucas
Jun Koba Sato, William Saunders, Maksym Taran, Ben West, and Elizabeth Barnes. Rebench: Evaluating frontier ai r&d capabilities of language model agents against human
experts. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 66772–66832, 2025. URL
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wijk25a.html.
Yifan Yang, Ziyang Gong, Weiquan Huang, Qihao Yang, Ziwei Zhou, Zisu Huang, Yan Li,
Xuemei Gao, Qi Dai, Bei Liu, Kai Qiu, Yuqing Yang, Dongdong Chen, Xue Yang, and
Chong Luo. Skillopt: Executive strategy for self-evolving agent skills, 2026. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2605.23904.
Haojie Ye, Arjun Laxman, Yichao Yuan, Krisztian Flautner, and Nishil Talati. Blazingaml:
High-throughput anti-money laundering (aml) via multi-stage graph mining, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.12241.

14

